=head1 NAME

gedafe-javascript - Documentation on javascript and gedafe

=head1 STATUS

Important!

READ THIS:
Gedafe pearls and oysters are not protected from javascript
insertion attacs. Programmers that 

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Javascript poses a great threat to the security of any web based
system. By default all javascript is therefor disabled in
the content display of gedafe.
To enable showing javascript you should do two things:
* set javascript = 1 in meta_fields for every field in every
table and view that is allowed to display javascript.
* set the global configuration javascript_allow_override => 1
in the Start section of your cgi program.



=head1 Example

First you have to tell Gedafe that it should allow overriding
the default behaviour of javascript filtering.
This is done by placing the line

 javascript_allow_override      => 1,

into the Start command of your Gedafe CGI.

Seccondly you have to enable javascript per table or per view 
for every field that you want to display scripted behaviour.
This is done in the meta_fields table of the database.

e.g.:
This row in meta_fields the database would allow javascript 
for the product_description field in the demo database.
product | product_description | javascript | 1

Please note that if product_list would have existed, we would
have needed a seperate entry to enable it in the listing too.


=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2004 Freek Zindel, All rights reserved.


=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

=head1 AUTHOR

S<Freek Zindel E<lt>freek@zindel.nlE<gt>>
